variable-scope: ports content from core repo (#44)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-1: functions-continued/variable-scope.md

# Variable Scope

## Learning Goals

- Define variable scope
- Explain that variable scope affects how variables are defined and accessed
- Use variable scope to determine when to make variables

## Introduction

> Recall what variables are. In programming, we store values in memory. When we create variables, we create _names_ that references those stored values in memory.

Author: This is an awesome point/idea, I think I have a good idea about where to put it. Thank you!

| Local Variable       | A kind of variable that has the smallest scope: local scope. The most common kind of variable.                                                                                | Variable                                                 | "`foo` is a local variable," "Let's create a local variable called `foo`"                                                                                                                                                         |
| Function             | Lines of code (1 or more) that are related, grouped together, and named. Once defined, these lines of code are reusable and can be called over and over again.                | Method                                                   | "I defined a function," "I used a function," "I wrote a function"                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Global Variable      | A kind of variable that has the largest scope: global scope.                                                                                                                  | Global variable                                          | "It's dangerous to use the global variable `bar` inside of the function," "We can read the global variable `bar` anywhere in the file."                                                                                           |

Author: ```suggestion
| Global Variable      | A kind of variable that has the largest scope: global scope.                                                                                                                  | global                                                   | "It's dangerous to use the global variable `bar` inside of the function," "We can read the global variable `bar` anywhere in the file."                                                                                           |
```

In this example, we access the variable `my_daily_fruit` on the line `print(f"An {my_daily_fruit} a day keeps the doctor away?")`, and it doesn't give us a runtime error. This means that the variable `my_daily_fruit` is **in scope** of that line.

### Debugging Variable Scope: `NameError`

When programmers try to access a variable that is **not** in scope, programmers will often get a runtime error `NameError` for that variable.

Observe and run this code that attempts to access `my_daily_fruit` even though `my_daily_fruit` is not defined within this code.

```python
print(f"An {my_daily_fruit} a day keeps the doctor away?")
```

Our error message gives us a clue that **the variable `my_daily_fruit` isn't defined within this scope.** Therefore, we got an error for accessing a variable not in scope.

```bash
NameError: name 'my_daily_fruit' is not defined
```

## Variable Scope Is Defined By Kind and Location

Now that we know what variable scope is, how does a variable's scope get determined? What are the rules that say what a variable's scope is?

Variable scope is determined by:

1. The kind of variable that's defined
2. The location (line of code) where the variable is defined

> ### Local Variables are the Most Popular Kind

Author: Oooooh. I think I have that wrong in a couple of places, but I'll work on correcting that in the future

**Local variables** are a kind of variable. Everything we've learned about variables so far still apply to local variables.

Properties of local variables:

- named with the `lower_snake_case` naming convention we've been using so far already.
- the most common kind of variable (and account for 90% of the variables we will use).
- variables with the smallest scope. Details to be discovered over time.

```python
my_daily_fruit = "apple"
print(f"The variable {my_daily_fruit} is a local variable.")

> ```

Author: I LOVE THIS

### Functions Create New Local Variable Scope

Local variables defined inside of a function only have scope **within that function.**

If we try to access a variable that was scoped to a function, we will get our predicted `NameError`.

```python
def display_breakfast():
    breakfast_message = "My breakfast today is an apple"
    print(f"{breakfast_message}")

display_breakfast()
print("Let's try to access the value of breakfast_message outside of the display_breakfast function:")
print(f"The value of breakfast_message is {breakfast_message}")
```

In our example above, when we try to access `breakfast_message` outside of its scope (in the `display_breakfast` function), we get the error message `NameError: name 'breakfast_message' is not defined`.

After a function "finishes" (the function `return`s or it exits/finishes running), the local variables "leave" and are "released." The local variables will simply not reference any values anymore (and the computer memory that held those values gets recovered), and we'll never be able to access those local variables again.

> The local variables "restart" when the function gets called again; when a function gets called again, and all relevant local variables get re-initialized.

Author: I love it, thanks for trusting your gut and submitting this rec, I wasn't sure which bar to aim for in this

print(f"The value of breakfast message is {breakfast_fruit}")
```

In our example above, when we try to access the parameter `breakfast_fruit` outside of its scope (in the `display_breakfast` function), we get the error message `NameError: name 'breakfast_fruit' is not defined`.

#### Return Values Are Important

Because local variables "disappear" after each function, let's revisit functions.

If we want a **value** to come _out_ of a function, we **must** use the function's `return` statement to return that value.

```python
def display_breakfast():
    breakfast_message = "My breakfast today is an apple"
    print(f"{breakfast_message}")
    return breakfast_message

resulting_message = display_breakfast()
print("Instead of trying to access breakfast_message, let's return breakfast_message, store it in resulting_message, and access resulting_message instead:")
print(f"The value of resulting_message is {resulting_message}")
```

**This will be one of the main patterns that we use in programming.**

### Recognizing Variable Scope

Beyond functions, other kinds of **blocks of code** in Python also create variable scope. We will learn about those in detail in the future.

> For now, here is **one tip**: there is **a pattern** between **local variable scope** and **its level of indentation** in code.

Author: Cooooooooool, thanks for the correction!! Iiinteresting, truly. :0

  - Over time, we'll learn more tools that will help us avoid using global variables, or increase our code quality even when we do use global variables.

```python
def display_breakfast():
    print("Let's try to access the value of breakfast_message INSIDE of the display_breakfast function:")
    print(f"{breakfast_message}")

breakfast_message = "My breakfast today is an apple"
print("Let's try to access the value of breakfast_message OUTSIDE of the display_breakfast function:")
print(f"The value of breakfast message is {breakfast_message}")

display_breakfast()
```

In this example, `breakfast_message` is a global variable, because it was declared **outside** of any function in our code. We are able to access it outside of the `display_breakfast` function, AND inside the `display_breakfast` function. We did **not** get a `NameError` when running this code, because `breakfast_message` is in scope.

Because global variable scope is so large and so powerful, global variable scope gives programmers more opportunities to create bugs. Over time, observe what tools and strategies are introduced to help lower this risk!

### !callout-info

## Variables Best Practices

> Technically, Python has one specific rule about global variables: we can **read** global variables anywhere. However, **declaring** global variables inside of a function is a little trickier. We discourage declaring global variables inside of functions! Programmers discourage it so much, that this curriculum won't even teach you how to do it! Feel free to look this up. A search engine term to use could be "Python use global variables".

Author: Manually changing your suggestion to remove the final "But let's try to avoid this in our own code!" -- Within the context of this section, I think it's snappier to not repeat that and leave it as a "You're free to check if you still want to by the end of this paragraph lol"

I'm leaving the phrase "has one specific rule" so the awkward phrasing gives emphasis as a fact to remember. lol /shrug

### !end-callout

## We Use Variable Scope To Solve Problems

We will apply our knowledge about variable scope to help us solve future programming problems.

### It's Extremely Helpful That Local Variables "Leave"

Recall: Inside of functions, what happens to every local variable after a function finishes (returns or exits)? After a function finishes, every local variable "gets released," or becomes unusuable. The local variable only "comes back" if we call the function again, when it will be re-initialized with a new value and a new place in memory.

When we want to reliably call a function multiple times, knowing that local variables "leave" after each function call, and "restart" in each function call, creates more reliable code.

In this example, follow these steps in order:

1. Read the code and comments, and trace the values of the local variable after each function call
2. Predict what the code will print out
3. Run the code
4. Compare your predictions against what you actually see

> 5. Write down your conclusions about how local variables "leave" at the end of each function call, and get re-initialized at the beginning of each function call.

Author: About the conclusion + guidance, good question ;) I'll leave it as is for now, and resist my temptation to put "draw a picture"

# print(f"Uncommenting this line and trying to access breakfast_message will create a NameError: {breakfast_message}")
display_breakfast("rice and soup")
display_breakfast("coffee and toast")
# print(f"Uncommenting this line and trying to access breakfast_of_champions will create a NameError: {breakfast_of_champions}")
# print(f"Uncommenting this line and trying to access breakfast_message will create a NameError: {breakfast_message}")
```

At first, it may be frustrating that we can't access `breakfast_of_champions` or `breakfast_message` outside of the function.

On the bright side, it makes our code extremely consistent and predictable: Python will **never** think `breakfast_of_champions` has any value, except when we pass a value into the `display_breakfast` function call. Programming and using variables to know what values they **aren't** is just as valuable as knowing what values they are.

### Our Strategies Will Evolve!

As we learn about more concepts, such as _iteration_ and _classes_, we'll see that local variables have special scope within those kinds of blocks.

It will be crucial to understand the local variable scope for those cases, too, and to rely on them.

> Looking ahead: When we learn about _iteration_ in programming, most syntaxes for iteration create their own variable scope.

Reviewer: Again, this is inaccurate.  There is no special variable scope created. The variable created for iteration has the same  scope as any other variable created in the same context, and lives beyond the end of the iteration.

In this example, follow these steps in order:

1. Read this code and make a prediction about what it does and what will happen when you run it
2. Run it
3. Make predictions about where the local variables are, and what rules about scope they may follow
4. Write down your predictions

```python
def announce_lunch_menu(lunch_items):
    print("It is now time to declare each lunch item, slowly, and dramatically.")
    for lunch_item in lunch_items:
        print("Today we will eat......")
        print("a.....")
        print(lunch_item)

>     print("I hope you're hungry!")

Reviewer: I'm not sure of the value of including this sample here. If iteration is covered elsewhere, and there's nothing special about scope as it relates to the surrounding discussion, this just seems to muddy the water.

I would consider cutting the entire 'Our Strategies Will Evolve!' section so that iteration gets the full discussion it needs rather than possible confusing things by squeezing this aside in here.

packed_lunchbox_contents = ["sandwich", "salad", "chips", "appy juice"]
announce_lunch_menu(packed_lunchbox_contents)
```

## Summary

Variable scope is the area of a program where a variable can be accessed.

When we access variables that are within scope, we can read them, manipulate them, re-assign them, and do all the good things that variables can do.

> When we access variables out of scope, we get errors. We often get errors like `NameError`.

Reviewer: Maybe this is a little more "punchy"?
```suggestion
When we access variables out of scope, we get errors: usually `NameError`.
```

> We will often make **local variables** within functions, that are scoped to that function.

Reviewer: Rephrased to smooth the functions/function disparity.
```suggestion
We often make **local variables** within functions. Those variables are locally scoped to the function in which they are created.
```

### !challenge

* type: multiple-choice
* id: 45954838-a89d-4b65-a5db-e6e52aae3ed7
* title: Variable Scope

##### !question

Finish this sentence: Variable scope is...

##### !end-question

##### !options

* the area of a program where a variable can be defined for the first time
* the area of a program where a variable can be accessed
* the area of a program where a variable can be released from memory
* the area of a program where a variable can be renamed

##### !end-options

##### !answer

* the area of a program where a variable can be accessed

##### !end-answer

### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- Question 2 -->

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
### !challenge

* type: multiple-choice
* id: e3584e35-5c7d-4e46-a210-a1a0b697e8c0
* title: Local Variables

##### !question

Read this code, and assume `cut`, `cook`, and `plate` are all valid, defined functions.

```python
def prepare_dinner(ingredients):
    chopped_food = cut(ingredients)
    cooked_food = cook(chopped_food)
    plated_food = plate(cooked_food)
    return plated_food

prepare_dinner(["Jackfruit", "Onion", "Mango", "Avocado", "Ginger", "Cucumber", "Lime", "Jalapeño"])
```

> Variables that have can be read inside of the function are...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variables that can be read inside of the `prepare_dinner` function are...
```
